.TH ADD_TEST 3 "September 2001" "" "CUnit Programmer's Manual"

.SH "NAME"
add_test_group, add_test_case - test group/case addition to the test registry

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B #include <CUnit/TestDB.h>
.TP
.BR "PTestGroup add_test_group (char* strName, InitializeFunc pInit, CleanupFunc pClean);"
.TP
.BR "PTestCase add_test_case(PTestGroup pGroup, char* strName, TestFunc pTest);"

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B "add_test_group"
adds a test group to the test registry. Test registry should be initialized
before any test group is added to it. A test group should be uniquely named
and hence identified uniquely in the test registry. A test group is also viewed as a 
bunch of test cases and should be named uniquely under the test group but 
may be same under different test groups.
.B "add_test_case"
adds a test case to the test group that is specified in the call. A test group
should be created before adding any test case to it. Test cases in the test
group should be named uniquely under the test group but may be same under 
different test groups.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On successfuly operation
.B "add_test_group"
returns pointer to the group added and 
.B "add_test_case"
returns pointer to the test case added to the specified group and the internal
error status is set to CUE_SUCCESS. In case of failure they return NULL Value
and the internal error number is set to one of the following values string 
description of which can be obtained by making a call to 
.B "get_error(void)"
function.
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NOREGISTRY"
Test Registry is not initialized
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NO_GROUPNAME"
Test group name is not specified or is NULL
.TP 2
.B "CUE_DUP_GROUP"
Test group with this name already exists in the registry
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NOGROUP"
Specified group name doesn't exists in the registry
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NO_TESTNAME"
Test name is not specified or is NULL
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NOTEST"
Test function not specified
.TP 2
.B "CUE_DUP_TEST"
Test case with this name already exists in the specified test group
.TP 2
.B "CUE_NOMEMORY"
Memory allocation failed
.TP 2
		
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR "CUnit" (8),
.BR "initialize_registry" (3),
.BR "cleanup_registry" (3)

.SH "AUTHOR"
Anil Kumar <aksaharan@yahoo.com>

.SH "WEBSITE"
http://cunit.sourceforge.net
